release notes for v23.1.0-alpha.3 (#16305)
cockroachdb/docs: _includes/releases/v23.1/v23.1.0-alpha.3.md

- Fixed a bug that caused the server to crash if trying to restore a table from a backup generated by `BACKUP TABLE` from a schema that includes [user-defined functions](../v22.2/user-defined-functions.html), and the restore target database does not have a schema with the same name. [#96911][#96911] 
- Changefeeds with the `unordered` option can use multi-region [Google Cloud Pub/Sub topics](../v22.2/changefeed-sinks.html). [#96567][#96567] 
- Fixed a bug in changefeeds where long running [initial scans](../v22.2/create-changefeed.html#initial-scan) will fail to generate checkpoints. Failure to generate [checkpoints](../v22.2/change-data-capture-overview.html#how-does-an-enterprise-changefeed-work) is particularly bad if the changefeed restarts. Without checkpoints, the changefeed will restart from the beginning, and in the worst case, when exporting substantially sized tables, the changefeed initial scan may not complete. [#96995][#96995]

<h3 id="v23-1-0-alpha-3-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - Added [latency information](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/statements-page.html#statement-statistics) in seconds to the statement statistics on `crdb_internal.statement_statistics`, `system.statement_statistics`, and `crdb_internal.cluster_statement_statistics`, with information about: `min`, `max`, `p50`, `p90`, and `p99. Also added the columns: `latency_seconds_min`, `latency_seconds_max`, `latency_seconds_p50`, `latency_seconds_p90`, and `latency_seconds_p99` to `crdb_internal.node_statement_statistics`.[#96396][#96396]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added [latency information](../cockroachcloud/statements-page.html#statement-statistics) in seconds to the statement statistics on `crdb_internal.statement_statistics`, `system.statement_statistics`, and `crdb_internal.cluster_statement_statistics`, with information about: `min`, `max`, `p50`, `p90`, and `p99. Also added the columns: `latency_seconds_min`, `latency_seconds_max`, `latency_seconds_p50`, `latency_seconds_p90`, and `latency_seconds_p99` to `crdb_internal.node_statement_statistics`.[#96396][#96396]
```

> - Deprecated the `PGDUMP` and `MYSQLDUMP` formats for [`IMPORT`](../v22.2/import.html). They are still present, but will be removed in a future release. See the [Migration Overview](../v22.2/migration-overview) page for alternatives. [#96386][#96386]

Author: ```suggestion
- Deprecated the `PGDUMP` and `MYSQLDUMP` formats for [`IMPORT`](../v22.2/import.html). They are still present, but will be removed in a future release. See the [Migration Overview](../v22.2/migration-overview.html) page for alternatives. [#96386][#96386]
```

> - Deprecated the `PGDUMP` and `MYSQLDUMP` formats for [`IMPORT`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/import.html). They are still present, but will be removed in a future release. See the [Migration Overview](../v22.2/migration-overview) page for alternatives. [#96386][#96386]

Author: ```suggestion
- Deprecated the `PGDUMP` and `MYSQLDUMP` formats for [`IMPORT`](../v22.2/import.html). They are still present, but will be removed in a future release. See the [Migration Overview](../v22.2/migration-overview) page for alternatives. [#96386][#96386]
```

> - Deprecated the PGDUMP and MYSQLDUMP formats for [IMPORT](../v22.2/import-performance-best-practices.html). They are still present, but will be removed in a future release. View this [page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v22.2/migration-overview) for alternatives. [#96386][#96386]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deprecated the `PGDUMP` and `MYSQLDUMP` formats for [`IMPORT`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/import.html). They are still present, but will be removed in a future release. See the [Migration Overview](../v22.2/migration-overview) page for alternatives. [#96386][#96386]
```

- [`COPY ... FROM ... QUOTE '"'`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v22.2/copy-from) will no longer error. [#96572][#96572]
- Added `last_error_code` column to the `crdb_internal.node_statement_statistics` table. Added `last_error_code` field to the `statistics` JSON blob in the `crdb_internal.statement_statistics` and `system.statement_statistics` tables. [#96436][#96436]

> - Added support for expressions of the form `COLLATE "default"`, `COLLATE "C"`, and `COLLATE "POSIX"`. Since the default [collation](../v22.2/collate.html) cannot be changed currently, these expressions are all equivalent. The expressions are evaluated by treating the input as a normal string, and ignoring the collation.  This means that comparisons between strings and collated strings that use "default", "C", or "POSIX" are now supported.  Creating a column with the "C" or "POSIX" collations is still not supported. [#96828][#96828]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support for expressions of the form `COLLATE "default"`, `COLLATE "C"`, and `COLLATE "POSIX"`. Since the default [collation](../v22.2/collate.html) cannot be changed currently, these expressions are all equivalent. The expressions are evaluated by treating the input as a normal string, and ignoring the collation.  This means that comparisons between strings and collated strings that use `"default"`, `"C"`, or `"POSIX"` are now supported.  Creating a column with the `"C"` or `"POSIX"` collations is still not supported. [#96828][#96828]
```

- The insights subsystem in `sqlstats` is now able to detect failed executions, regardless if they were slow or not. [#97039][#97039]
- The internal `statement_statistics` and `transaction_statistics` tables now include sampled execution statistics on storage iteration. [#96016][#96016]

> - Introduced the `declare_cursor_statement_timeout_enabled` [session variable](set-vars.html) that disables statement timeouts during `FETCH` when using `DECLARE CURSOR`. [#96607][#96607]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduced the `declare_cursor_statement_timeout_enabled` [session variable](../v22.2/set-vars.html) that disables statement timeouts during `FETCH` when using `DECLARE CURSOR`. [#96607][#96607]
```

<h3 id="v23-1-0-alpha-3-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - A [BACKUP](../v22.2/backup.html) which encounters too many retryable errors will now fail instead of pausing to allow subsequent backups the chance to succeed. [#96673][#96673]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [`BACKUP`](../v22.2/backup.html) that encounters too many retryable errors will now fail instead of pausing to allow subsequent backups the chance to succeed. [#96673][#96673]
```

> - A [BACKUP](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/backup.html) which encounters too many retryable errors will now fail instead of pausing to allow subsequent backups the chance to succeed. [#96673][#96673]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [`BACKUP`](../v22.2/backup.html) that encounters too many retryable errors will now fail instead of pausing to allow subsequent backups the chance to succeed. [#96673][#96673]
```

> - Added option to balance CPU time (cpu) instead of queries per second (qps) among stores in a cluster. This is done by setting `kv.allocator.load_based_rebalancing.objective='cpu'`. `kv.allocator.cpu_rebalance_threshold` is also added, similar to `kv.allocator.qps_rebalance_threshold` to control the target range for store cpu above and below the cluster mean. [#96127][#96127]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added an option to balance CPU time (`cpu`) instead of queries per second (`qps`) among stores in a cluster. This is done by setting `kv.allocator.load_based_rebalancing.objective='cpu'`. `kv.allocator.cpu_rebalance_threshold` is also added, similar to `kv.allocator.qps_rebalance_threshold` to control the target range for store CPU above and below the cluster mean. [#96127][#96127]
```

- Added the flag `--disable-max-offset-check` to disable node self-termination when it detects [clock skew](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/operational-faqs.html#what-happens-when-node-clocks-are-not-properly-synchronized) with the rest of the cluster beyond `--max-offset`. The operator assumes responsibility for ensuring that real clock skew never exceeds `--max-offset`. [#96141][#96141]

<h3 id="v23-1-0-alpha-3-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- Added execution insights to the [Statement Fingerprint Details](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/statements-page.html#sql-statement-fingerprints) and [Transaction Fingerprint Details](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/ui-transactions-page.html#transaction-fingerprints-view) pages. [#96440][#96440]

> - Txn insights that were not found will now display a message `Insight not found`. [#96832][#96832]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Transaction insights that were not found will now display a message `Insight not found`. [#96832][#96832]
```

- Txn insights that were not found will now display a message `Insight not found`. [#96832][#96832]
- Added waiting statement ID and fingerprint to the [insights transaction](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/ui-insights-page.html#transaction-executions-view) details page. Added blocking transaction ID and fingerprint to the the [insights statement](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/ui-insights-page.html#statement-executions-view) page. [#96872][#96872]

<h3 id="v23-1-0-alpha-3-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

- Fixed a bug where casting a [TimeTZ](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/time.html) to an array results in displaying second offsets even if they are zero. [#96583][#96583]
- Allowed [`ALTER TABLE .. ADD/DROP CONSTRAINT .. NOT VALID`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/alter-table.html) and [`VALIDATE CONSTRAINT ..`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/alter-table.html#validate-constraints) to behave consistently with PostgreSQL. Previously, the `VALIDATE CONSTRAINT` would fail and cause the whole statement to fail.[#96648][#96648]

> - Resolved the [TimestampTZ](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/timestamp.html) to match PostgreSQL. We previously included the minute/second offset for TimestampTZ in certain places when casting it to string even when they were zero. [#96833][#96833]

Reviewer: `TIMESTAMPTZ`

"Previously, the minute/second offset was included for `TIMESTAMPTZ` in certain places when casting it to a [`STRING`](string.html), even when they were zero."

> - Resolved using negative years instead of BC when casting a [TimestampTZ](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/timestamp.html) to a string. [#96833][#96833]

Reviewer: Same here, in terms of types in code formatting, as per the previous note.

- Fixed the [`SHOW GRANTS FOR public`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/show-grants.html) command so it works correctly. Previously, this would return an error saying that the `public` role does not exist. [#96957][#96957]
- Statement source (square bracket) syntax is no longer allowed in [user-defined functions](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/user-defined-functions.html). Prior to this fix, using this syntax in a UDF would cause a panic. This restriction will be lifted in the future. [#96824][#96824]

<h3 id="v23-1-0-alpha-3-performance-improvements">Performance improvements</h3>

> - The execution of multiple [FOREIGN KEY](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/foreign-key.html) and [UNIQUE](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/unique.html) constraint checks have been parallelized in some cases. As a result, these checks should be completed faster, especially so in multi-region environments where the checks require cross-region reads. [#96123][#96123]

Reviewer: ... particularly in multi-region environments... 

Foreign key and unique are both SQL statements here, so they need backticks.
